Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews.
Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay science fiction writer since 1952.
He has written over 40 novels and over 80 short stories focusing on a wide variety of subjects.
These range from Tarzan to the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic priest.
Farmer's most famous works are the Riverworld series, the World of Tears series, his erotic fantasy novels, and the story, later a novel, The Lovers.
We asked Farmer how he started writing science fiction.
I started reading science fiction when I was seven years old.
I'm 63 now, and I knew I always wanted to be a writer.
Although I didn't do much about it for many years.
The funny thing is, I actually intended to become a mainstream writer.
That is, to write stories which are not in particular genre.
But I somehow or other just drifted into science fiction.
And sold my first science fiction story in 1952.
That was called The Lovers.
It was a novelette, which was published in a magazine.
And it's generally credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in a science fiction magazine.
We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break taboos by writing The Lovers.
No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboos.
I didn't really consciously set out to do it, because I had the idea, and I thought it was terrific.
On the other hand, I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting it accepted.
And I did.
I did have a lot of trouble.
The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor of Astounding, was the most prestigious and the highest paying market.
So naturally, I sent it to him first.
And he returned it with a comment that nauseated him.
So I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had about the same word rates.
His comments were something like John Campbell's.
So then I sent it to Samuel Mines, who was editor of a magazine called Startling Stories.
And he immediately accepted it and knew that it was a revolutionary breakthrough.
I published it, and I was on my way.
Except that the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary.
And it took me a year before I could get anybody to accept it.
Farmer is also interested in religion in its varied forms, and has used it in his works.
My interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my works.
Although a lot of people, when they say the name Farmer, immediately think of sex in the book.
The fact is I've written much more about religion than about sex.
Or sometimes both at the same time.
But in some respects, sex and religion are two sides of the same coin.
In certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes.
Farmer feels that he may have labored in relative anonymity for years because his writings are so varied.
But he has his reasons.
One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days, I think, really becoming identified and getting a band of followers,
is that I didn't beat on just one or two drums.
I ranged all over the field.
But I find out that if I do a variety of stuff, then I don't get tired.
Each new novel is a new challenge.
I'm not just working the same old theme again.
Tomorrow we continue with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews.
We're continuing our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
We want to explore here some background related to one of Farmer's major themes, religion.
As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself a writer of religious themes, even more so than a writer of sexual themes.
His own religious background is quite checkered.
I was sent to Sunday school when I was very little, and I became interested in the Bible, and I read it on my own.
And I even read the Book of Mormon when I was about nine years old.
And I always wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, predestination, grace, the afterlife, and all that sort of stuff.
I was raised as a Christian scientist up until the time I was about 12.
And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church where there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of predestination.
And then when I was about 16, I guess I became an atheist.
Now I've gone through atheism through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the disciples of Christ.
And then I backslid, fell from grace, as the theological term goes.
And then I lapsed back into agnosticism.
And what are Farmer's present beliefs?
My present situation is that without immortality, life has no meaning.
And that if there's a creation, there must be a creator.
But I've become tremendously interested in what to sometimes refer to as mythicism.
It isn't really like the Muslim Sufism school.
Then a lot of related stuff like that.
You might say right now, I'm in a sort of a limbo.
Heading towards something, I don't know what.
The concept of an afterlife appears repeatedly in Farmer's works.
Well, if you think about it, you know, there could be a million different possibilities in an afterlife if there were.
But one of my perhaps unstated themes is that immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being.
That it's in the evolutionary drive of man for him to invent immortality himself.
Well, the drawback to that is those people who are already dead will remain dead, right?
So that doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality, where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last one.
I like to do a lot of variations on that.
I have a new book called The Unreasoning Mask.
That's the location of Moby Dick.
And this is concerned with theology, afterlife, immortality.
You might call it a philosophical-theological space opera.
Many of Farmer's first works had the central theme of religion.
The Lovers and A Woman a Day deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the Sturch.
A popular character, Father John Carmody, is a planet-hopping Catholic priest who has appeared in several short stories.
We learn about his former life and conversion in the excellent novel Night of Light.
Inside Outside is a wild tale about the afterlife and immortality.
It is, in fact, the predecessor to the famous Riverworld series, which we will discuss in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews.
Having looked into Philip Jose Farmer's feelings on religion and immortality,
we began a look today at the Riverworld Series.
Farmer explains the basis of the story.
It concerns the planet in which there's a 10 million mile long river,
which follows the valley.
And everybody that lived from about 150,000 B.C. to about 1883 A.D.
was resurrected along the banks of the river.
And rejuvenated for them.
Looks like there were 25.
And the main mystery behind the whole thing was,
why were all these people resurrected?
Who did it and how?
But the Riverworld concept is so big that Farmer has managed only to scratch the surface
in the four main novels of the series.
There are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four novels,
but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too much.
It would have taken too many sidetracks, you might say.
I might still be working on that particular series.
What else is left?
Listen to Farmer as he gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover.
I didn't go into any detail on how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and every time.
I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet.
Like, well, there's Karl Marx, for instance.
What would he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after he died?
Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a planet where there are very few pigments available,
for instance, for him to paint.
What would he do there?
I also wanted to bring up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth,
show what they would do there.
Now, one of the things about the riverworld was that,
although you were resurrected there in a youthful body of your own,
as it was in 25 or earlier, if you died in 425,
if, for instance, you were 83 when you died,
you know, your mind is still 83 and you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you,
now, is your character formed?
Are you going to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same person?
Or are you going to improve?
And is the magic labyrinth the last word on the Riverworld?
I made a lot of people mad at me.
Because of that last sentence there, or paragraph, I should say,
that I wrote in the magic labyrinth,
everything seems to have been settled.
Everything has been cleared up.
And then one of the characters,
the kind of minor one,
Peter Jairus Frigate,
he's celebrating with the others in the misty tower,
when he thinks he hears a footfall outside in the hallway.
He blows out, comes back, and says to the others,
I didn't see anyone, it must have been my imagination.
A lot of readers got mad at me because they thought,
oh no, he's going to write another one.
He's leaving a loophole.
Well, I am leaving a loophole.
And I don't know whether I'll go through it or not.
But it's quite possible that the magic labyrinth
wasn't the final one in that series before.
That everything that our protagonist learned,
and everything that everybody else learned,
is completely untrue or half true.
So the Riverworld novels may or may not be finished,
but we do have some more sidestream stories to anticipate.
More on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews.
Our show today continues the discussion with Philip Jose Farmer.
A major incident in Farmer's career began when Venus on the Half-Shell,
a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout,
appeared in the pages of fantasy and science fiction in late 74, early 75.
Of course, Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.
The character Trout is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer
who appears in a number of Vonnegut's novels.
We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore Trout.
I was a fan of Vonnegut's novels.
I liked all his books, but Kilgore Trout really turned me on
because his early experiences, and as a matter of fact his later ones too,
were like a lot of my early experiences,
and a lot like the experiences of many other science fiction writers.
Back in the old days when they weren't being paid much,
and science fiction was looked down upon,
and we were being taken due to our inexperience by various publishers and agents.
Also, I had a tough time getting any recognition.
So, I guess that's why I identified with him,
plus the fact he's a great character.
Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus on the Half-Shell,
either pro or con,
because most of the reviewers approached the work as if Vonnegut were the author.
This caused Farmer the opportunity to write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym.
I don't know what his reactions are to the novel itself,
but so many people thought that he'd written it,
and he would tell you it's hundreds of maybe thousands,
but then the reviews came out.
Some said Venus on the Half Shell by Kilgore Trout.
It was the worst thing he'd written,
and others said it was the best thing he'd ever written.
When I applied for permission to write The Son of Jimmy Valentine,
which I really would have loved to have done,
because I could have had a lot of fun with it,
he said no,
which is his prerogative.
We asked if The Son of Jimmy Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel.
It was his, uh,
not only his one and only specifically erotic book,
it was also his only non-science fiction book.
Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors,
who in turn write about their own fictional authors,
and so on.
Listen as he describes what writing as Kilgore Trout started.
In the Venus on the Half-Shell,
uh,
the protagonist,
Simon Wagstaff,
had his favorite science fiction author.
Just as in the Vonnegut books,
Eliot Rosewater thought that
Kilgore Trout was the greatest, uh,
living writer,
you know,
in any field.
He should have been president of the U.S.
He could have solved all the problems.
Well,
anyway,
in Venus on the Half Shell,
uh,
Simon Wagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a
fellow called Jonathan Swift Somers III,
and I described his various works,
or Al Bynum,
and give the title.
But Jonathan Swift Somers,
who's a fiction author,
wrote about a giant German shepherd police dog,
whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a laboratory,
and he became a private detective.
Now,
uh,
I plan eventually someday on writing a book by Ralph von
Valvao,
this dog,
under the,
under the name of Ralph von Valvao.
And then maybe I'll end the cycle by
having Ralph von Valvao write about a human named, uh,
Vonnegut,
or something like that,
and completing it,
going right back to Vonnegut again.
Farmer conceived of the extended family group called the
Wold-Newton family,
in which many great historical and fictional characters are
descended from the Scarlet Pimpernel.
Thus,
Kilgore Trout is related to Sherlock Holmes,
Doc Savage,
Sam Spade,
and James Bond,
among others.
We will look into this aspect of Farmer's writing some more
tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews.
This show will conclude our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
Yesterday,
we discussed Farmer's penchant for writing under pseudonyms.
As it turns out,
this practice has a very desirable side effect.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the fictional author device to break a writing block.
I had a writing block once,
that terrible thing that sometimes happens to writers.
They don't know what causes it.
For some reason,
they might have many ideas,
be eager to go,
but when they sit down in front of a typewriter,
nothing happens.
Well,
that happened to me once.
I never thought it would.
I thought I was immune to such a thing.
But it did.
And after wrestling for two months and getting no place,
I had an idea.
I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story,
not by Philip Jose Farmer,
but by David Copperfield,
they'd say.
I don't remember which particular nom,
the clue maybe.
Uh,
story poured out.
Very good.
Um,
I thought so anyway.
Uh,
when I'd completed that,
the writing block was gone.
See,
I wasn't writing then as me,
Philip Jose Farmer,
but as,
Kilgore Trout.
And,
I was in his shoes.
I had no trouble.
Now,
the funny thing about this is,
it's a,
uh,
it's a
psychological trick
that I'm conscious of,
see.
Uh,
and yet it works.
It's not like I'm trying to trick my unconscious,
but I must be doing it,
one way or another.
Well,
I don't,
I don't know of anybody else
who's ever broken a writer's block
in that manner,
but I recommend trying it.
Farmer has also written several books
featuring Tarzan
or Tarzan-like characters.
Tarzan Alive
is Tarzan's biography.
The erotic novel,
A Feast Unknown,
and its clean sequels,
The Mad Goblin
and Lord of the Trees,
feature thinly veiled versions
of Tarzan and Doc Savage,
Lord Tiger,
The Opar Books,
and The Adventures of the Peerless Peer
also have Tarzan-like protagonists.
We asked Farmer
when he developed
his interest in Tarzan.
I first read Tarzan
when I guess I was about
seven or eight years old
and I became
wrapped up in that early age
with the works of
Edgar Rice Burroughs.
And,
but when I started college,
I kind of lost interest
and didn't read them anymore.
But later,
Farmer picked up on Tarzan again.
This time he saw Tarzan
in a different light.
I started reading books
about Tarzan again
and this time,
although I still kept
a lot of my childhood interest in him,
a sense of wonder about him,
I began seeing things
in Tarzan, for instance,
I had not seen before.
He was not,
not just a child
who'd been cast away
and raised by great apes
and then become a creature
of the jungle
and then return
to claim fortune.
He was sort of a,
an archetype
of many, many
heroes from classical myths.
And now,
I'm sure that when Burroughs
wrote this,
he didn't know
what he was doing
but he did it unconsciously.
I think that
it's the creation
of Tarzan
and the stroke of genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer
but he has,
he has a great character
just like
A. Conan Doyle
is not a great writer
but he created
a great character.
Sherlock Holmes.
Philip Jose Farmer,
an author with a seemingly
endless supply
of unique ideas
who appears just now
to be gaining
widespread acceptance.
This has been
the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of
the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction
with Odessa College
in Odessa, Texas.